can you celebrate life and not cling to
it
can you give up control and still get
things done
can you achieve your goals without
forcing
these are all themes we find in the
ancient taoist key work
called the dao de jing which was written
by a mysterious sage
named lao tzu there isn't much known
about this character of chinese
antiquity and some historians even doubt
that it truly existed
but whoever wrote the dao de jing has
inspired millions of people to see the
world in a different
light taoism deeply respects the passive
receptive part of existence which is
generally
undervalued by becoming more aware of
the strength of
what the taoists call the feminine or
the yin
aspects of life we'll see that effort
and force
aren't always the best tools in the
toolbox for getting things done
in a previous video the philosophy of
flow i expand upon the so called
flow state known as the soft power of wu
way
or effortless action also described as
being in the zone when participating in
certain activities
like sports and painting this video
however
explores how the wisdom of lautzer can
help us go with the flow
in a more general sense how can we let
go
and let ourselves be carried along with
the river of life
how can we live more effortlessly with
less stress
and anxiety how can we live a rich life
and
enjoy it to the fullest with minimal
interference of the natural course
the following five lessons based on the
writings of lao tzu
might inspire you to live life in an
entirely different
way
[Music]
one don't force anything the master does
not force virtue on others
thus she is able to accomplish her task
the ordinary person who uses
force will find that they accomplish
nothing
in several chapters of the dao de jing
lautzer writes about the principle
of not forcing when we force we go
against the natural flow of things which
most likely
gets us in trouble oftentimes a fallacy
we make
is thinking that we can force the
unenforceable
believing that when we push hard enough
we'll eventually get where we want to go
for some things pushing hard
consistently indeed leads to results
but no matter what we do there are
always natural laws
that we must take into account laozi
observed that
nature has its own way of doing things
living in this world
we see that nature manifests itself in a
certain order
some things are big and heavy other
things are small and light
some things take ages to grow other
things are born
and die on the same day we humans are
bound to the flow of nature as well
the way we grow from infants to adults
the way we learn
the way our bodies function all is bound
to the natural laws that we cannot
control
if we force things we put ourselves in a
position
in which the universe starts to work
against us
this happens for example when we swim
against the stream
we can swim against the stream for a
while but we won't last long
as it's highly exhausting and when we
finally give in
and accept that forcing our way up
simply cannot be done
we let go and start to flow along
when we somehow find a way to work with
nature instead of against it things will
get much easier
and we won't exhaust ourselves so much
this means
working smart instead of working hard by
setting our sales correctly
and navigating diligently so that the
wind of the universe keeps pushing us
forward two
don't overburden yourself those who
stand on tiptoes
do not stand firmly those who rush ahead
don't get very far those who try to
outshine others
dim their own light a typical phenomenon
that we see in current civilization
is that people are willing to push
themselves too far
pushing boundaries isn't wrong in itself
as it's a way to grow
if we look at strength training for
example it's actually necessary to
overstimulate the muscles
by breaking down the muscles during a
lifting session
using progressive overload they'll come
back stronger and bigger
over time but there's one necessary
ingredient when it comes to this process
that many beginning lifters tend to
overlook
which is rest when we repeatedly
overburden the muscles
we will eventually be unable to continue
our training
as they don't get enough time to heal
even though our intention was making
ourselves stronger we have actually
become
weaker chronic exhaustion leads to a
lower immune system and also makes us
more prone to depression
according to countless studies so why do
people do this
it's because they want to become very
muscular
very quickly but by pushing themselves
too hard
they've put themselves in a fragile
position lao tzu would describe this
as standing on tiptoes as he argues that
when we stand on our tiptoes we don't
stand firmly
there always needs to be a balance
between action and
inaction between the effort we put into
things and the time we let the body and
mind
recover stretching ourselves beyond our
means
may get more work done in the short term
sure
but as loud observed it will make us
weak and vulnerable
as well another example are people who
take out a mortgage
that's just slightly affordable as long
as they keep earning what they earn
working stressful jobs yes this will
lead to a big house in the short term
but this situation requires these people
to always stay on the hamster wheel and
never go below a certain income they're
chained to a payment obligation
and cannot afford to take on a job
that's less stressful
if that decreases their income and
why often it's not because they need it
but rather to show off to other people
and this comes with a price
the more wealth you possess the harder
it is
to protect loud stated and when one
fills a cup to the brim
it becomes quite difficult to carry it
around
so ideally if we take lautz's wisdom to
heart
we want to stand firmly with two feet on
the ground
with everything we do
three stop controlling the world
do you want to rule the world and
control it
i don't think it can ever be done the
world is a sacred vessel and it cannot
be controlled
you will only make it worse if you try
it may slip through your fingers
and disappear have you ever observed
that many of our problems
solve themselves intervening isn't
always necessary
moreover in many cases intervention only
creates more problems
everything is in motion which means that
circumstances change
all the time and that today's problems
can become tomorrow's
blessings we can see this in the
workplace often
as there's always a certain manager who
excessively tries to control
all processes and only causes stress and
division within the team
deadlines aren't being met co-workers
hate each other and there's always
drama going on but when this manager is
away for a few weeks
everything seems to go smoothly lautsu
states
that a good leader doesn't control but
operates from the background
she lets people do things themselves and
intervenes
only sparingly there's a difference
between delegating
and controlling between leading and
imposing
leading and delegating can be done
softly and without much interference
letting things go with the flow
controlling and imposing often go
together
with force in practice we might want to
take a step
back a bit more often before we
intervene
in many cases the natural course will
make things work out
just fine this basically comes down to
trusting the universe
so that we can let go of control
4. enough is enough those who know they
have enough
are truly wealthy as we tend to
overburden ourselves we also have
this nasty feature of gathering much
more than we
need we see that the wealthy try to get
wealthier
for them increasing their possessions is
life but when we always aim for getting
more
don't we forget to live our needs come
with natural limits we only need enough
food to stay energized
during the day and we only need enough
water to stay hydrated
too much is harmful taoist sage zhuangzi
invigorates this argument by telling us
about
the mouse that only takes a belly full
of water when drinking at a pond
a mouse naturally refrains from
over-encumbering itself
as drinking too much will take its toll
on the body
nevertheless humans often accumulate
more than they need
the main reason for this seems to be
fear the fear of not having all this
stuff
diminishes who they are it's an ego
thing
having more means i am more we also fear
that we won't have enough in the future
but as we know the future is uncertain
we can die tomorrow and everything we
own can be taken away from us
in an instant whoever knows contentment
will be at peace forever
loudsis states but we can only know when
we have enough
if we realize that the value we
attribute to external things
is based on the illusion we aren't what
we have
as none of these possessions are within
our control
this includes even our own bodies having
an excess of external things
eventually becomes a burden the things
you own
end up owning you as with a mouse
there's only so much we can take
of course it's not a bad idea to have
for example a nice house
and money in the bank as long as we
don't become slaves to what we
own moderation is the key
5. don't cling to life i have heard
that those who celebrate life walk
safely
among the wild animals when they go into
battle
they remain unharmed there's a
difference between
celebrating life and clinging to life if
you cling to life
there is nothing to celebrate life has
become
immensely serious and even painful we're
anxious
because we see death the mother of all
fears in every corner
the fear of death is what makes us cling
to life
and how loud sir puts it those who are
stiff and rigid
are the disciples of death those who are
soft and yielding
are the disciples of life those who
don't cling to life therefore
aren't a threat because they aren't
fearful and
wild animals don't see the need to
attack them
now the fear of death manifests within
us
in ways that are very subtle many people
claim
that they don't fear death because they
don't fear this
imagined idea of what death is but
this mere idea rarely resembles truth
as we cannot possibly imagine what it is
not
to be there's something however that
lies quite close
to the experience of complete
annihilation which is
losing what we cling to we may cling to
our beauty so we are afraid of aging
we may cling to our reputation so we are
always hyper vigilant
when it comes to what other people say
or think about us
we may cling to our wealth so we're
always busy defending it
now an aging body a bad reputation or
poverty
do not equal death as we can still live
and live well while enduring these
things
however it may equal the death of our
self-image
the story we tell about ourselves for
most people this is where the fear of
death
really lies and this is what they cling
to thus the true fear of death
lies in the idea of losing who we think
we are
that's why in war soldiers fear the idea
of not dying in honor more than dying
itself
but by clinging to the idea of ourselves
and the world around us
we deny the nature of the universe
which is that change is the only
constant
the story we tell ourselves about
ourselves today will lose its accuracy
tomorrow the same goes for the story we
tell ourselves
about the world when we cling to one
thing we resist
another and what we resist will stick
but what we accept we move beyond
the ability to let go and go with the
flow and to be a flexible operator in a
chaotic universe
is what makes us disciples of life
and these were the five lessons based on
the writings of
taoist sage lauter
thank you for watching
[Music]
you